THREE QUESTIONS It once occurred to a certain king, that if he always knew the

right time to begin everything; if he knew who were the right people to listen

to, and whom to avoid; and, above all, if he always knew what was the

most important thing to do, he would never fail in anything he might undertake. And

this thought having occurred to him, he had it proclaimed throughout his kingdom that he

would give a great reward to any one who would teach him what was the

right time for every action, and who were the most necessary people, and how he

might know what was the most important thing to do. And learned men came to

the King, but they all answered his questions differently. In reply to the first question,

some said that to know the right time for every action, one must draw up

in advance, a table of days, months and years, and must live strictly according to

it. Only thus, said they, could everything be done at its proper time. Others declared

that it was impossible to decide beforehand the right time for every action; but that,

not letting oneself be absorbed in idle pastimes, one should always attend to all that

was going on, and then do what was most needful. Others, again, said that however

attentive the King might be to what was going on, it was impossible for one

man to decide correctly the right time for every action, but that he should have

a Council of wise men, who would help him to fix the proper time for

everything. But then again others said there were some things which could not wait to

be laid before a Council, but about which one had at once to decide whether

to undertake them or not. But in order to decide that, one must know beforehand

what was going to happen. It is only magicians who know that; and, therefore, in

order to know the right time for every action, one must consult magicians. Equally various

were the answers to the second question. Some said, the people the King most needed

were his councillors; others, the priests; others, the doctors; while some said the warriors were

the most necessary. To the third question, as to what was the most important occupation:

some replied that the most important thing in the world was science. Others said it

was skill in warfare; and others, again, that it was religious worship. All the answers

being different, the King agreed with none of them, and gave the reward to none.

But still wishing to find the right answers to his questions, he decided to consult

a hermit, widely renowned for his wisdom. The hermit lived in a wood which he

never quitted, and he received none but common folk. So the King put on simple

clothes, and before reaching the hermit’s cell dismounted from his horse, and, leaving his body-guard

behind, went on alone. When the King approached, the hermit was digging the ground in

front of his hut. Seeing the King, he greeted him and went on digging. The

hermit was frail and weak, and each time he stuck his spade into the ground

and turned a little earth, he breathed heavily. The King went up to him and

said: “I have come to you, wise hermit, to ask you to answer three questions:

How can I learn to do the right thing at the right time? Who are

the people I most need, and to whom should I, therefore, pay more attention than

to the rest? And, what affairs are the most important, and need my first attention?”

The hermit listened to the King, but answered nothing. He just spat on his hand

and recommenced digging. “You are tired,” said the King, “let me take the spade and

work awhile for you.” “Thanks!” said the hermit, and, giving the spade to the King,

he sat down on the ground. When he had dug two beds, the King stopped

and repeated his questions. The hermit again gave no answer, but rose, stretched out his

hand for the spade, and said: “Now rest awhile-and let me work a bit.” But

the King did not give him the spade, and continued to dig. One hour passed,

and another. The sun began to sink behind the trees, and the King at last

stuck the spade into the ground, and said: “I came to you, wise man, for

an answer to my questions. If you can give me none, tell me so, and

I will return home.” “Here comes some one running,” said the hermit, “let us see

who it is.” The King turned round, and saw a bearded man come running out

of the wood. The man held his hands pressed against his stomach, and blood was

flowing from under them. When he reached the King, he fell fainting on the ground

moaning feebly. The King and the hermit unfastened the man’s clothing. There was a large

wound in his stomach. The King washed it as best he could, and bandaged it

with his handkerchief and with a towel the hermit had. But the blood would not

stop flowing, and the King again and again removed the bandage soaked with warm blood,

and washed and rebandaged the wound. When at last the blood ceased flowing, the man

revived and asked for something to drink. The King brought fresh water and gave it

to him. Meanwhile the sun had set, and it had become cool. So the King,

with the hermit’s help, carried the wounded man into the hut and laid him on

the bed. Lying on the bed the man closed his eyes and was quiet; but

the King was so tired with his walk and with the work he had done,

that he crouched down on the threshold, and also fell asleep—so soundly that he slept

all through the short summer night. When he awoke in the morning, it was long

before he could remember where he was, or who was the strange bearded man lying

on the bed and gazing intently at him with shining eyes. “Forgive me!” said the

bearded man in a weak voice, when he saw that the King was awake and

was looking at him. “I do not know you, and have nothing to forgive you

for,” said the King. “You do not know me, but I know you. I am

that enemy of yours who swore to revenge himself on you, because you executed his

brother and seized his property. I knew you had gone alone to see the hermit,

and I resolved to kill you on your way back. But the day passed and

you did not return. So I came out from my ambush to find you, and

I came upon your bodyguard, and they recognized me, and wounded me. I escaped from

them, but should have bled to death had you not dressed my wound. I wished

to kill you, and you have saved my life. Now, if I live, and if

you wish it, I will serve you as your most faithful slave, and will bid

my sons do the same. Forgive me!” The King was very glad to have made

peace with his enemy so easily, and to have gained him for a friend, and

he not only forgave him, but said he would send his servants and his own

physician to attend him, and promised to restore his property. Having taken leave of the

wounded man, the King went out into the porch and looked around for the hermit.

Before going away he wished once more to beg an answer to the questions he

had put. The hermit was outside, on his knees, sowing seeds in the beds that

had been dug the day before. The King approached him, and said: “For the last

time, I pray you to answer my questions, wise man.” “You have already been answered!”

said the hermit, still crouching on his thin legs, and looking up at the King,

who stood before him. “How answered? What do you mean?” asked the King. “Do you

not see,” replied the hermit. “If you had not pitied my weakness yesterday, and had

not dug those beds for me, but had gone your way, that man would have

attacked you, and you would have repented of not having stayed with me. So the

most important time was when you were digging the beds; and I was the most

important man; and to do me good was your most important business. Afterwards when that

man ran to us, the most important time was when you were attending to him,

for if you had not bound up his wounds he would have died without having

made peace with you. So he was the most important man, and what you did

for him was your most important business. Remember then: there is only one time that

is important—Now! It is the most important time because it is the only time when

we have any power. The most necessary man is he with whom you are, for

no man knows whether he will ever have dealings with any one else: and the

most important affair is, to do him good, because for that purpose alone was man

sent into this life!” THE COFFEE-HOUSE OF SURAT (After Bernardin de Saint-Pierre) In the town

of Surat, in India, was a coffee-house where many travellers and foreigners from all parts

of the world met and conversed. One day a learned Persian theologian visited this coffee-house.

He was a man who had spent his life studying the nature of the Deity,

and reading and writing books upon the subject. He had thought, read, and written so

much about God, that eventually he lost his wits, became quite confused, and ceased even

to believe in the existence of a God. The Shah, hearing of this, had banished

him from Persia. After having argued all his life about the First Cause, this unfortunate

theologian had ended by quite perplexing himself, and instead of understanding that he had lost

his own reason, he began to think that there was no higher Reason controlling the

universe. This man had an African slave who followed him everywhere. When the theologian entered

the coffee-house, the slave remained outside, near the door, sitting on a stone in the

glare of the sun, and driving away the flies that buzzed around him. The Persian

having settled down on a divan in the coffee-house, ordered himself a cup of opium.

When he had drunk it and the opium had begun to quicken the workings of

his brain, he addressed his slave through the open door: “Tell me, wretched slave,” said

he, “do you think there is a God, or not?” “Of course there is,” said

the slave, and immediately drew from under his girdle a small idol of wood. “There,”

said he, “that is the God who has guarded me from the day of my

birth. Every one in our country worships the fetish tree, from the wood of which

this God was made.” This conversation between the theologian and his slave was listened to

with surprise by the other guests in the coffee-house. They were astonished at the master’s

question, and yet more so at the slave’s reply. One of them, a Brahmin, on

hearing the words spoken by the slave, turned to him and said: “Miserable fool! Is

it possible you believe that God can be carried under a man’s girdle? There is

one God—Brahma, and he is greater than the whole world, for he created it. Brahma

is the One, the mighty God, and in His honour are built the temples on

the Ganges’ banks, where his true priests, the Brahmins, worship him. They know the true

God, and none but they. A thousand score of years have passed, and yet through

revolution after revolution these priests have held their sway, because Brahma, the one true God,

has protected them.” So spoke the Brahmin, thinking to convince every one; but a Jewish

broker who was present replied to him, and said: “No! the temple of the true

God is not in India. Neither does God protect the Brahmin caste. The true God

is not the God of the Brahmins, but of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. None does

He protect but His chosen people, the Israelites. From the commencement of the world, our

nation has been beloved of Him, and ours alone. If we are now scattered over

the whole earth, it is but to try us; for God has promised that He

will one day gather His people together in Jerusalem. Then, with the Temple of Jerusalem—the

wonder of the ancient world—restored to its splendor, shall Israel be established a ruler over

all nations.” So spoke the Jew, and burst into tears. He wished to say more,

but an Italian missionary who was there interrupted him. “What you are saying is untrue,”

said he to the Jew. “You attribute injustice to God. He cannot love your nation

above the rest. Nay rather, even if it be true that of old He favored

the Israelites, it is now nineteen hundred years since they angered Him, and caused Him

to destroy their nation and scatter them over the earth, so that their faith makes

no converts and has died out except here and there. God shows preference to no

nation, but calls all who wish to be saved to the bosom of the Catholic

Church of Rome, the one outside whose borders no salvation can be found.” So spoke

the Italian. But a Protestant minister, who happened to be present, growing pale, turned to

the Catholic missionary and exclaimed: “How can you say that salvation belongs to your religion?

Those only will be saved, who serve God according to the Gospel, in spirit and

in truth, as bidden by the word of Christ.” Then a Turk, an office-holder in

the custom-house at Surat, who was sitting in the coffee-house smoking a pipe, turned with

an air of superiority to both the Christians. “Your belief in your Roman religion is

vain,” said he. “It was superseded twelve hundred years ago by the true faith: that

of Mohammed! You cannot but observe how the true Mohammed faith continues to spread both

in Europe and Asia, and even in the enlightened country of China. You say yourselves

that God has rejected the Jews; and, as a proof, you quote the fact that

the Jews are humiliated and their faith does not spread. Confess then the truth of

Mohammedanism, for it is triumphant and spreads far and wide. None will be saved but

the followers of Mohammed, God’s latest prophet; and of them, only the followers of Omar,

and not of Ali, for the latter are false to the faith.” To this the

Persian theologian, who was of the sect of Ali, wished to reply; but by this

time a great dispute had arisen among all the strangers of different faiths and creeds

present. There were Abyssinian Christians, Llamas from Thibet, Ismailians and Fireworshippers. They all argued about

the nature of God, and how He should be worshipped. Each of them asserted that

in his country alone was the true God known and rightly worshipped. Every one argued

and shouted, except a Chinaman, a student of Confucius, who sat quietly in one corner

of the coffee-house, not joining in the dispute. He sat there drinking tea and listening

to what the others said, but did not speak himself. The Turk noticed him sitting

there, and appealed to him, saying: “You can confirm what I say, my good Chinaman.

You hold your peace, but if you spoke I know you would uphold my opinion.

Traders from your country, who come to me for assistance, tell me that though many

religions have been introduced into China, you Chinese consider Mohammedanism the best of all, and

adopt it willingly. Confirm, then, my words, and tell us your opinion of the true

God and of His prophet.” “Yes, yes,” said the rest, turning to the Chinaman, “let

us hear what you think on the subject.” The Chinaman, the student of Confucius, closed

his eyes, and thought a while. Then he opened them again, and drawing his hands

out of the wide sleeves of his garment, and folding them on his breast, he

spoke as follows, in a calm and quiet voice. Sirs, it seems to me that

it is chiefly pride that prevents men agreeing with one another on matters of faith.

If you care to listen to me, I will tell you a story which will

explain this by an example. I came here from China on an English steamer which

had been round the world. We stopped for fresh water, and landed on the east

coast of the island of Sumatra. It was midday, and some of us, having landed,

sat in the shade of some cocoanut palms by the seashore, not far from a

native village. We were a party of men of different nationalities. As we sat there,

a blind man approached us. We learned afterwards that he had gone blind from gazing

too long and too persistently at the sun, trying to find out what it is,

in order to seize its light. He strove a long time to accomplish this, constantly

looking at the sun; but the only result was that his eyes were injured by

its brightness, and he became blind. Then he said to himself: “The light of the

sun is not a liquid; for if it were a liquid it would be possible

to pour it from one vessel into another, and it would be moved, like water,

by the wind. Neither is it fire; for if it were fire, water would extinguish

it. Neither is light a spirit, for it is seen by the eye; nor is

it matter, for it cannot be moved. Therefore, as the light of the sun is

neither liquid, nor fire, nor spirit, nor matter, it is—nothing!” So he argued, and, as

a result of always looking at the sun and always thinking about it, he lost

both his sight and his reason. And when he went quite blind, he became fully

convinced that the sun did not exist. With this blind man came a slave, who

after placing his master in the shade of a cocoanut tree, picked up a cocoanut

from the ground, and began making it into a night-light. He twisted a wick from

the fibre of the cocoanut: squeezed oil from the nut in the shell, and soaked

the wick in it. As the slave sat doing this, the blind man sighed and

said to him: “Well, slave, was I not right when I told you there is

no sun? Do you not see how dark it is? Yet people say there is

a sun.... But if so, what is it?” “I do not know what the sun

is,” said the slave. “That is no business of mine. But I know what light

is. Here I have made a night-light, by the help of which I can serve

you and find anything I want in the hut.” And the slave picked up the

cocoanut shell, saying: “This is my sun.” A lame man with crutches, who was sitting

near by, heard these words, and laughed: “You have evidently been blind all your life,”

said he to the blind man, “not to know what the sun is. I will

tell you what it is. The sun is a ball of fire, which rises every

morning out of the sea and goes down again among the mountains of our island

each evening. We have all seen this, and if you had had your eyesight you

too would have seen it.” A fisherman, who had been listening to the conversation said:

“It is plain enough that you have never been beyond your own island. If you

were not lame, and if you had been out as I have in a fishing-boat,

you would know that the sun does not set among the mountains of our island,

but as it rises from the ocean every morning so it sets again in the

sea every night. What I am telling you is true, for I see it every

day with my own eyes.” Then an Indian who was of our party, interrupted him

by saying: “I am astonished that a reasonable man should talk such nonsense. How can

a ball of fire possibly descend into the water and not be extinguished? The sun

is not a ball of fire at all, it is the Deity named Deva, who

rides for ever in a chariot round the golden mountain, Meru. Sometimes the evil serpents

Ragu and Ketu attack Deva and swallow him: and then the earth is dark. But

our priests pray that the Deity may be released, and then he is set free.

Only such ignorant men as you, who have never been beyond their own island, can

imagine that the sun shines for their country alone.” Then the master of an Egyptian

vessel, who was present, spoke in his turn. “No,” said he, “you also are wrong.

The sun is not a Deity, and does not move only round India and its

golden mountain. I have sailed much on the Black Sea, and along the coasts of

Arabia, and have been to Madagascar and to the Philippines. The sun lights the whole

earth, and not India alone. It does not circle round one mountain, but rises far

in the East, beyond the Isles of Japan, and sets far, far away in the

West, beyond the islands of England. That is why the Japanese call their country ‘Nippon,’

that is, ‘the birth of the sun.’ I know this well, for I have myself

seen much, and heard more from my grandfather, who sailed to the very ends of

the sea.” He would have gone on, but an English sailor from our ship interrupted

him. “There is no country,” he said “where people know so much about the sun’s

movements as in England. The sun, as every one in England knows, rises nowhere and

sets nowhere. It is always moving round the earth. We can be sure of this

for we have just been round the world ourselves, and nowhere knocked up against the

sun. Wherever we went, the sun showed itself in the morning and hid itself at

night, just as it does here.” And the Englishman took a stick and, drawing circles

on the sand, tried to explain how the sun moves in the heavens and goes

round the world. But he was unable to explain it clearly, and pointing to the

ship’s pilot said: “This man knows more about it than I do. He can explain

it properly.” The pilot, who was an intelligent man, had listened in silence to the

talk till he was asked to speak. Now every one turned to him, and he

said: “You are all misleading one another, and are yourselves deceived. The sun does not

go round the earth, but the earth goes round the sun, revolving as it goes,

and turning towards the sun in the course of each twenty-four hours, not only Japan,

and the Philippines, and Sumatra where we now are, but Africa, and Europe, and America,

and many lands besides. The sun does not shine for some one mountain, or for

some one island, or for some one sea, nor even for one earth alone, but

for other planets as well as our earth. If you would only look up at

the heavens, instead of at the ground beneath your own feet, you might all understand

this, and would then no longer suppose that the sun shines for you, or for

your country alone.” Thus spoke the wise pilot, who had voyaged much about the world,

and had gazed much upon the heavens above. “So on matters of faith,” continued the

Chinaman, the student of Confucius, “it is pride that causes error and discord among men.

As with the sun, so it is with God. Each man wants to have a

special God of his own, or at least a special God for his native land.

Each nation wishes to confine in its own temples Him, whom the world cannot contain.

“Can any temple compare with that which God Himself has built to unite all men

in one faith and one religion? “All human temples are built on the model of

this temple, which is God’s own world. Every temple has its fonts, its vaulted roof,

its lamps, its pictures or sculptures, its inscriptions, its books of the law, its offerings,

its altars and its priests. But in what temple is there such a font as

the ocean; such a vault as that of the heavens; such lamps as the sun,

moon, and stars; or any figures to be compared with living, loving, mutually-helpful men? Where

are there any records of God’s goodness so easy to understand as the blessings which

God has strewn abroad for man’s happiness? Where is there any book of the law

so clear to each man as that written in his heart? What sacrifices equal the

self-denials which loving men and women make for one another? And what altar can be

compared with the heart of a good man, on which God Himself accepts the sacrifice?

“The higher a man’s conception of God, the better will he know Him. And the

better he knows God, the nearer will he draw to Him, imitating His goodness, His

mercy, and His love of man. “Therefore, let him who sees the sun’s whole light

filling the world, refrain from blaming or despising the superstitious man, who in his own

idol sees one ray of that same light. Let him not despise even the unbeliever

who is blind and cannot see the sun at all.” So spoke the Chinaman, the

student of Confucius; and all who were present in the coffee-house were silent, and disputed

no more as to whose faith was the best. HOW MUCH LAND DOES A MAN

NEED? An elder sister came to visit her younger sister in the country. The elder

was married to a tradesman in town, the younger to a peasant in the village.

As the sisters sat over their tea talking, the elder began to boast of the

advantages of town life: saying how comfortably they lived there, how well they dressed, what

fine clothes her children wore, what good things they ate and drank, and how she

went to the theatre, promenades, and entertainments. The younger sister was piqued, and in turn

disparaged the life of a tradesman, and stood up for that of a peasant. “I

would not change my way of life for yours,” said she. “We may live roughly,

but at least we are free from anxiety. You live in better style than we

do, but though you often earn more than you need, you are very likely to

lose all you have. You know the proverb, ‘Loss and gain are brothers twain.’ It

often happens that people who are wealthy one day are begging their bread the next.

Our way is safer. Though a peasant’s life is not a fat one, it is

a long one. We shall never grow rich, but we shall always have enough to

eat.” The elder sister said sneeringly: “Enough? Yes, if you like to share with the

pigs and the calves! What do you know of elegance or manners! However much your

good man may slave, you will die as you are living-on a dung heap-and your

children the same.” “Well, what of that?” replied the younger. “Of course our work is

rough and coarse. But, on the other hand, it is sure; and we need not

bow to any one. But you, in your towns, are surrounded by temptations; today all

may be right, but tomorrow the Evil One may tempt your husband with cards, wine,

or women, and all will go to ruin. Don’t such things happen often enough?” Pahom,

the master of the house, was lying on the top of the oven, and he

listened to the women’s chatter. “It is perfectly true,” thought he. “Busy as we are

from childhood tilling Mother Earth, we peasants have no time to let any nonsense settle

in our heads. Our only trouble is that we haven’t land enough. If I had

plenty of land, I shouldn’t fear the Devil himself!” The women finished their tea, chatted

a while about dress, and then cleared away the tea-things and lay down to sleep.

But the Devil had been sitting behind the oven, and had heard all that was

said. He was pleased that the peasant’s wife had led her husband into boasting, and

that he had said that if he had plenty of land he would not fear

the Devil himself. “All right,” thought the Devil. “We will have a tussle. I’ll give

you land enough; and by means of that land I will get you into my

power.” II Close to the village there lived a lady, a small landowner, who had

an estate of about three hundred acres. She had always lived on good terms with

the peasants, until she engaged as her steward an old soldier, who took to burdening

the people with fines. However careful Pahom tried to be, it happened again and again

that now a horse of his got among the lady’s oats, now a cow strayed

into her garden, now his calves found their way into her meadows-and he always had

to pay a fine. Pahom paid, but grumbled, and, going home in a temper, was

rough with his family. All through that summer Pahom had much trouble because of this

steward; and he was even glad when winter came and the cattle had to be

stabled. Though he grudged the fodder when they could no longer graze on the pasture-land,

at least he was free from anxiety about them. In the winter the news got

about that the lady was going to sell her land, and that the keeper of

the inn on the high road was bargaining for it. When the peasants heard this

they were very much alarmed. “Well,” thought they, “if the innkeeper gets the land he

will worry us with fines worse than the lady’s steward. We all depend on that

estate.” So the peasants went on behalf of their Commune, and asked the lady not

to sell the land to the innkeeper; offering her a better price for it themselves.

The lady agreed to let them have it. Then the peasants tried to arrange for

the Commune to buy the whole estate, so that it might be held by all

in common. They met twice to discuss it, but could not settle the matter; the

Evil One sowed discord among them, and they could not agree. So they decided to

buy the land individually, each according to his means; and the lady agreed to this

plan as she had to the other. Presently Pahom heard that a neighbor of his

was buying fifty acres, and that the lady had consented to accept one half in

cash and to wait a year for the other half. Pahom felt envious. “Look at

that,” thought he, “the land is all being sold, and I shall get none of

it.” So he spoke to his wife. “Other people are buying,” said he, “and we

must also buy twenty acres or so. Life is becoming impossible. That steward is simply

crushing us with his fines.” So they put their heads together and considered how they

could manage to buy it. They had one hundred roubles laid by. They sold a

colt, and one half of their bees; hired out one of their sons as a

laborer, and took his wages in advance; borrowed the rest from a brother-in-law, and so

scraped together half the purchase money. Having done this, Pahom chose out a farm of

forty acres, some of it wooded, and went to the lady to bargain for it.

They came to an agreement, and he shook hands with her upon it, and paid

her a deposit in advance. Then they went to town and signed the deeds; he

paying half the price down, and undertaking to pay the remainder within two years. So

now Pahom had land of his own. He borrowed seed, and sowed it on the

land he had bought. The harvest was a good one, and within a year he

had managed to pay off his debts both to the lady and to his brother-in-law.

So he became a landowner, ploughing and sowing his own land, making hay on his

own land, cutting his own trees, and feeding his cattle on his own pasture. When

he went out to plough his fields, or to look at his growing corn, or

at his grass meadows, his heart would fill with joy. The grass that grew and

the flowers that bloomed there, seemed to him unlike any that grew elsewhere. Formerly, when

he had passed by that land, it had appeared the same as any other land,

but now it seemed quite different. III So Pahom was well contented, and everything would

have been right if the neighboring peasants would only not have trespassed on his corn-fields

and meadows. He appealed to them most civilly, but they still went on: now the

Communal herdsmen would let the village cows stray into his meadows; then horses from the

night pasture would get among his corn. Pahom turned them out again and again, and

forgave their owners, and for a long time he forbore from prosecuting any one. But

at last he lost patience and complained to the District Court. He knew it was

the peasants’ want of land, and no evil intent on their part, that caused the

trouble; but he thought: “I cannot go on overlooking it, or they will destroy all

I have. They must be taught a lesson.” So he had them up, gave them

one lesson, and then another, and two or three of the peasants were fined. After

a time Pahom’s neighbours began to bear him a grudge for this, and would now

and then let their cattle on his land on purpose. One peasant even got into

Pahom’s wood at night and cut down five young lime trees for their bark. Pahom

passing through the wood one day noticed something white. He came nearer, and saw the

stripped trunks lying on the ground, and close by stood the stumps, where the tree

had been. Pahom was furious. “If he had only cut one here and there it

would have been bad enough,” thought Pahom, “but the rascal has actually cut down a

whole clump. If I could only find out who did this, I would pay him

out.” He racked his brains as to who it could be. Finally he decided: “It

must be Simon-no one else could have done it.” Se he went to Simon’s homestead

to have a look around, but he found nothing, and only had an angry scene.

However’ he now felt more certain than ever that Simon had done it, and he

lodged a complaint. Simon was summoned. The case was tried, and re-tried, and at the

end of it all Simon was acquitted, there being no evidence against him. Pahom felt

still more aggrieved, and let his anger loose upon the Elder and the Judges. “You

let thieves grease your palms,” said he. “If you were honest folk yourselves, you would

not let a thief go free.” So Pahom quarrelled with the Judges and with his

neighbors. Threats to burn his building began to be uttered. So though Pahom had more

land, his place in the Commune was much worse than before. About this time a

rumor got about that many people were moving to new parts. “There’s no need for

me to leave my land,” thought Pahom. “But some of the others might leave our

village, and then there would be more room for us. I would take over their

land myself, and make my estate a bit bigger. I could then live more at

ease. As it is, I am still too cramped to be comfortable.” One day Pahom

was sitting at home, when a peasant passing through the village, happened to call in.

He was allowed to stay the night, and supper was given him. Pahom had a

talk with this peasant and asked him where he came from. The stranger answered that

he came from beyond the Volga, where he had been working. One word led to

another, and the man went on to say that many people were settling in those

parts. He told how some people from his village had settled there. They had joined

the Commune, and had had twenty-five acres per man granted them. The land was so

good, he said, that the rye sown on it grew as high as a horse,

and so thick that five cuts of a sickle made a sheaf. One peasant, he

said, had brought nothing with him but his bare hands, and now he had six

horses and two cows of his own. Pahom’s heart kindled with desire. He thought: “Why

should I suffer in this narrow hole, if one can live so well elsewhere? I

will sell my land and my homestead here, and with the money I will start

afresh over there and get everything new. In this crowded place one is always having

trouble. But I must first go and find out all about it myself.” Towards summer

he got ready and started. He went down the Volga on a steamer to Samara,

then walked another three hundred miles on foot, and at last reached the place. It

was just as the stranger had said. The peasants had plenty of land: every man

had twenty-five acres of Communal land given him for his use, and any one who

had money could buy, besides, at fifty-cents an acre as much good freehold land as

he wanted. Having found out all he wished to know, Pahom returned home as autumn

came on, and began selling off his belongings. He sold his land at a profit,

sold his homestead and all his cattle, and withdrew from membership of the Commune. He

only waited till the spring, and then started with his family for the new settlement.

IV As soon as Pahom and his family arrived at their new abode, he applied

for admission into the Commune of a large village. He stood treat to the Elders,

and obtained the necessary documents. Five shares of Communal land were given him for his

own and his sons’ use: that is to say—125 acres (not altogether, but in different

fields) besides the use of the Communal pasture. Pahom put up the buildings he needed,

and bought cattle. Of the Communal land alone he had three times as much as

at his former home, and the land was good corn-land. He was ten times better

off than he had been. He had plenty of arable land and pasturage, and could

keep as many head of cattle as he liked. At first, in the bustle of

building and settling down, Pahom was pleased with it all, but when he got used

to it he began to think that even here he had not enough land. The

first year, he sowed wheat on his share of the Communal land, and had a

good crop. He wanted to go on sowing wheat, but had not enough Communal land

for the purpose, and what he had already used was not available; for in those

parts wheat is only sown on virgin soil or on fallow land. It is sown

for one or two years, and then the land lies fallow till it is again

overgrown with prairie grass. There were many who wanted such land, and there was not

enough for all; so that people quarrelled about it. Those who were better off, wanted

it for growing wheat, and those who were poor, wanted it to let to dealers,

so that they might raise money to pay their taxes. Pahom wanted to sow more

wheat; so he rented land from a dealer for a year. He sowed much wheat

and had a fine crop, but the land was too far from the village—the wheat

had to be carted more than ten miles. After a time Pahom noticed that some

peasant-dealers were living on separate farms, and were growing wealthy; and he thought: “If I

were to buy some freehold land, and have a homestead on it, it would be

a different thing, altogether. Then it would all be nice and compact.” The question of

buying freehold land recurred to him again and again. He went on in the same

way for three years; renting land and sowing wheat. The seasons turned out well and

the crops were good, so that he began to lay money by. He might have

gone on living contentedly, but he grew tired of having to rent other people’s land

every year, and having to scramble for it. Wherever there was good land to be

had, the peasants would rush for it and it was taken up at once, so

that unless you were sharp about it you got none. It happened in the third

year that he and a dealer together rented a piece of pasture land from some

peasants; and they had already ploughed it up, when there was some dispute, and the

peasants went to law about it, and things fell out so that the labor was

all lost. “If it were my own land,” thought Pahom, “I should be independent, and

there would not be all this unpleasantness.” So Pahom began looking out for land which

he could buy; and he came across a peasant who had bought thirteen hundred acres,

but having got into difficulties was willing to sell again cheap. Pahom bargained and haggled

with him, and at last they settled the price at 1,500 roubles, part in cash

and part to be paid later. They had all but clinched the matter, when a

passing dealer happened to stop at Pahom’s one day to get a feed for his

horse. He drank tea with Pahom, and they had a talk. The dealer said that

he was just returning from the land of the Bashkirs, far away, where he had

bought thirteen thousand acres of land all for 1,000 roubles. Pahom questioned him further, and

the tradesman said: “All one need do is to make friends with the chiefs. I

gave away about one hundred roubles’ worth of dressing-gowns and carpets, besides a case of

tea, and I gave wine to those who would drink it; and I got the

land for less than two cents an acre. And he showed Pahom the title-deeds, saying:

“The land lies near a river, and the whole prairie is virgin soil.” Pahom plied

him with questions, and the tradesman said: “There is more land there than you could

cover if you walked a year, and it all belongs to the Bashkirs. They are

as simple as sheep, and land can be got almost for nothing.” “There now,” thought

Pahom, “with my one thousand roubles, why should I get only thirteen hundred acres, and

saddle myself with a debt besides. If I take it out there, I can get

more than ten times as much for the money.” V Pahom inquired how to get

to the place, and as soon as the tradesman had left him, he prepared to

go there himself. He left his wife to look after the homestead, and started on

his journey taking his man with him. They stopped at a town on their way,

and bought a case of tea, some wine, and other presents, as the tradesman had

advised. On and on they went until they had gone more than three hundred miles,

and on the seventh day they came to a place where the Bashkirs had pitched

their tents. It was all just as the tradesman had said. The people lived on

the steppes, by a river, in felt-covered tents. They neither tilled the ground, nor ate

bread. Their cattle and horses grazed in herds on the steppe. The colts were tethered

behind the tents, and the mares were driven to them twice a day. The mares

were milked, and from the milk kumiss was made. It was the women who prepared

kumiss, and they also made cheese. As far as the men were concerned, drinking kumiss

and tea, eating mutton, and playing on their pipes, was all they cared about. They

were all stout and merry, and all the summer long they never thought of doing

any work. They were quite ignorant, and knew no Russian, but were good-natured enough. As

soon as they saw Pahom, they came out of their tents and gathered round their

visitor. An interpreter was found, and Pahom told them he had come about some land.

The Bashkirs seemed very glad; they took Pahom and led him into one of the

best tents, where they made him sit on some down cushions placed on a carpet,

while they sat round him. They gave him tea and kumiss, and had a sheep

killed, and gave him mutton to eat. Pahom took presents out of his cart and

distributed them among the Bashkirs, and divided amongst them the tea. The Bashkirs were delighted.

They talked a great deal among themselves, and then told the interpreter to translate. “They

wish to tell you,” said the interpreter, “that they like you, and that it is

our custom to do all we can to please a guest and to repay him

for his gifts. You have given us presents, now tell us which of the things

we possess please you best, that we may present them to you.” “What pleases me

best here,” answered Pahom, “is your land. Our land is crowded, and the soil is

exhausted; but you have plenty of land and it is good land. I never saw

the like of it.” The interpreter translated. The Bashkirs talked among themselves for a while.

Pahom could not understand what they were saying, but saw that they were much amused,

and that they shouted and laughed. Then they were silent and looked at Pahom while

the interpreter said: “They wish me to tell you that in return for your presents

they will gladly give you as much land as you want. You have only to

point it out with your hand and it is yours.” The Bashkirs talked again for

a while and began to dispute. Pahom asked what they were disputing about, and the

interpreter told him that some of them thought they ought to ask their Chief about

the land and not act in his absence, while others thought there was no need

to wait for his return. VI While the Bashkirs were disputing, a man in a

large fox-fur cap appeared on the scene. They all became silent and rose to their

feet. The interpreter said, “This is our Chief himself.” Pahom immediately fetched the best dressing-gown

and five pounds of tea, and offered these to the Chief. The Chief accepted them,

and seated himself in the place of honour. The Bashkirs at once began telling him

something. The Chief listened for a while, then made a sign with his head for

them to be silent, and addressing himself to Pahom, said in Russian: “Well, let it

be so. Choose whatever piece of land you like; we have plenty of it.” “How

can I take as much as I like?” thought Pahom. “I must get a deed

to make it secure, or else they may say, ‘It is yours,’ and afterwards may

take it away again.” “Thank you for your kind words,” he said aloud. “You have

much land, and I only want a little. But I should like to be sure

which bit is mine. Could it not be measured and made over to me? Life

and death are in God’s hands. You good people give it to me, but your

children might wish to take it away again.” “You are quite right,” said the Chief.

“We will make it over to you.” “I heard that a dealer had been here,”

continued Pahom, “and that you gave him a little land, too, and signed title-deeds to

that effect. I should like to have it done in the same way.” The Chief

understood. “Yes,” replied he, “that can be done quite easily. We have a scribe, and

we will go to town with you and have the deed properly sealed.” “And what

will be the price?” asked Pahom. “Our price is always the same: one thousand roubles

a day.” Pahom did not understand. “A day? What measure is that? How many acres

would that be?” “We do not know how to reckon it out,” said the Chief.

“We sell it by the day. As much as you can go round on your

feet in a day is yours, and the price is one thousand roubles a day.”

Pahom was surprised. “But in a day you can get round a large tract of

land,” he said. The Chief laughed. “It will all be yours!” said he. “But there

is one condition: If you don’t return on the same day to the spot whence

you started, your money is lost.” “But how am I to mark the way that

I have gone?” “Why, we shall go to any spot you like, and stay there.

You must start from that spot and make your round, taking a spade with you.

Wherever you think necessary, make a mark. At every turning, dig a hole and pile

up the turf; then afterwards we will go round with a plough from hole to

hole. You may make as large a circuit as you please, but before the sun

sets you must return to the place you started from. All the land you cover

will be yours.” Pahom was delighted. It-was decided to start early next morning. They talked

a while, and after drinking some more kumiss and eating some more mutton, they had

tea again, and then the night came on. They gave Pahom a feather-bed to sleep

on, and the Bashkirs dispersed for the night, promising to assemble the next morning at

daybreak and ride out before sunrise to the appointed spot. VII Pahom lay on the

feather-bed, but could not sleep. He kept thinking about the land. “What a large tract

I will mark off!” thought he. “I can easily go thirty-five miles in a day.

The days are long now, and within a circuit of thirty-five miles what a lot

of land there will be! I will sell the poorer land, or let it to

peasants, but I’ll pick out the best and farm it. I will buy two ox-teams,

and hire two more laborers. About a hundred and fifty acres shall be plough-land, and

I will pasture cattle on the rest.” Pahom lay awake all night, and dozed off

only just before dawn. Hardly were his eyes closed when he had a dream. He

thought he was lying in that same tent, and heard somebody chuckling outside. He wondered

who it could be, and rose and went out, and he saw the Bashkir Chief

sitting in front of the tent holding his side and rolling about with laughter. Going

nearer to the Chief, Pahom asked: “What are you laughing at?” But he saw that

it was no longer the Chief, but the dealer who had recently stopped at his

house and had told him about the land. Just as Pahom was going to ask,

“Have you been here long?” he saw that it was not the dealer, but the

peasant who had come up from the Volga, long ago, to Pahom’s old home. Then

he saw that it was not the peasant either, but the Devil himself with hoofs

and horns, sitting there and chuckling, and before him lay a man barefoot, prostrate on

the ground, with only trousers and a shirt on. And Pahom dreamt that he looked

more attentively to see what sort of a man it was lying there, and he

saw that the man was dead, and that it was himself! He awoke horror-struck. “What

things one does dream,” thought he. Looking round he saw through the open door that

the dawn was breaking. “It’s time to wake them up,” thought he. “We ought to

be starting.” He got up, roused his man (who was sleeping in his cart), bade

him harness; and went to call the Bashkirs. “It’s time to go to the steppe

to measure the land,” he said. The Bashkirs rose and assembled, and the Chief came,

too. Then they began drinking kumiss again, and offered Pahom some tea, but he would

not wait. “If we are to go, let us go. It is high time,” said

he. VIII The Bashkirs got ready and they all started: some mounted on horses, and

some in carts. Pahom drove in his own small cart with his servant, and took

a spade with him. When they reached the steppe, the morning red was beginning to

kindle. They ascended a hillock (called by the Bashkirs a shikhan) and dismounting from their

carts and their horses, gathered in one spot. The Chief came up to Pahom and

stretched out his arm towards the plain: “See,” said he, “all this, as far as

your eye can reach, is ours. You may have any part of it you like.”

Pahom’s eyes glistened: it was all virgin soil, as flat as the palm of your

hand, as black as the seed of a poppy, and in the hollows different kinds

of grasses grew breast high. The Chief took off his fox-fur cap, placed it on

the ground and said: “This will be the mark. Start from here, and return here

again. All the land you go round shall be yours.” Pahom took out his money

and put it on the cap. Then he took off his outer coat, remaining in

his sleeveless under coat. He unfastened his girdle and tied it tight below his stomach,

put a little bag of bread into the breast of his coat, and tying a

flask of water to his girdle, he drew up the tops of his boots, took

the spade from his man, and stood ready to start. He considered for some moments

which way he had better go—it was tempting everywhere. “No matter,” he concluded, “I will

go towards the rising sun.” He turned his face to the east, stretched himself, and

waited for the sun to appear above the rim. “I must lose no time,” he

thought, “and it is easier walking while it is still cool.” The sun’s rays had

hardly flashed above the horizon, before Pahom, carrying the spade over his shoulder, went down

into the steppe. Pahom started walking neither slowly nor quickly. After having gone a thousand

yards he stopped, dug a hole and placed pieces of turf one on another to

make it more visible. Then he went on; and now that he had walked off

his stiffness he quickened his pace. After a while he dug another hole. Pahom looked

back. The hillock could be distinctly seen in the sunlight, with the people on it,

and the glittering tires of the cartwheels. At a rough guess Pahom concluded that he

had walked three miles. It was growing warmer; he took off his under-coat, flung it

across his shoulder, and went on again. It had grown quite warm now; he looked

at the sun, it was time to think of breakfast. “The first shift is done,

but there are four in a day, and it is too soon yet to turn.

But I will just take off my boots,” said he to himself. He sat down,

took off his boots, stuck them into his girdle, and went on. It was easy

walking now. “I will go on for another three miles,” thought he, “and then turn

to the left. The spot is so fine, that it would be a pity to

lose it. The further one goes, the better the land seems.” He went straight on

a for a while, and when he looked round, the hillock was scarcely visible and

the people on it looked like black ants, and he could just see something glistening

there in the sun. “Ah,” thought Pahom, “I have gone far enough in this direction,

it is time to turn. Besides I am in a regular sweat, and very thirsty.”

He stopped, dug a large hole, and heaped up pieces of turf. Next he untied

his flask, had a drink, and then turned sharply to the left. He went on

and on; the grass was high, and it was very hot. Pahom began to grow

tired: he looked at the sun and saw that it was noon. “Well,” he thought,

“I must have a rest.” He sat down, and ate some bread and drank some

water; but he did not lie down, thinking that if he did he might fall

asleep. After sitting a little while, he went on again. At first he walked easily:

the food had strengthened him; but it had become terribly hot, and he felt sleepy;

still he went on, thinking: “An hour to suffer, a life-time to live.” He went

a long way in this direction also, and was about to turn to the left

again, when he perceived a damp hollow: “It would be a pity to leave that

out,” he thought. “Flax would do well there.” So he went on past the hollow,

and dug a hole on the other side of it before he turned the corner.

Pahom looked towards the hillock. The heat made the air hazy: it seemed to be

quivering, and through the haze the people on the hillock could scarcely be seen. “Ah!”

thought Pahom, “I have made the sides too long; I must make this one shorter.”

And he went along the third side, stepping faster. He looked at the sun: it

was nearly half way to the horizon, and he had not yet done two miles

of the third side of the square. He was still ten miles from the goal.

“No,” he thought, “though it will make my land lopsided, I must hurry back in

a straight line now. I might go too far, and as it is I have

a great deal of land.” So Pahom hurriedly dug a hole, and turned straight towards

the hillock. IX Pahom went straight towards the hillock, but he now walked with difficulty.

He was done up with the heat, his bare feet were cut and bruised, and

his legs began to fail. He longed to rest, but it was impossible if he

meant to get back before sunset. The sun waits for no man, and it was

sinking lower and lower. “Oh dear,” he thought, “if only I have not blundered trying

for too much! What if I am too late?” He looked towards the hillock and

at the sun. He was still far from his goal, and the sun was already

near the rim. Pahom walked on and on; it was very hard walking, but he

went quicker and quicker. He pressed on, but was still far from the place. He

began running, threw away his coat, his boots, his flask, and his cap, and kept

only the spade which he used as a support. “What shall I do,” he thought

again, “I have grasped too much, and ruined the whole affair. I can’t get there

before the sun sets.” And this fear made him still more breathless. Pahom went on

running, his soaking shirt and trousers stuck to him, and his mouth was parched. His

breast was working like a blacksmith’s bellows, his heart was beating like a hammer, and

his legs were giving way as if they did not belong to him. Pahom was

seized with terror lest he should die of the strain. Though afraid of death, he

could not stop. “After having run all that way they will call me a fool

if I stop now,” thought he. And he ran on and on, and drew near

and heard the Bashkirs yelling and shouting to him, and their cries inflamed his heart

still more. He gathered his last strength and ran on. The sun was close to

the rim, and cloaked in mist looked large, and red as blood. Now, yes now,

it was about to set! The sun was quite low, but he was also quite

near his aim. Pahom could already see the people on the hillock waving their arms

to hurry him up. He could see the fox-fur cap on the ground, and the

money on it, and the Chief sitting on the ground holding his sides. And Pahom

remembered his dream. “There is plenty of land,” thought he, “but will God let me

live on it? I have lost my life, I have lost my life! I shall

never reach that spot!” Pahom looked at the sun, which had reached the earth: one

side of it had already disappeared. With all his remaining strength he rushed on, bending

his body forward so that his legs could hardly follow fast enough to keep him

from falling. Just as he reached the hillock it suddenly grew dark. He looked up—the

sun had already set. He gave a cry: “All my labor has been in vain,”

thought he, and was about to stop, but he heard the Bashkirs still shouting, and

remembered that though to him, from below, the sun seemed to have set, they on

the hillock could still see it. He took a long breath and ran up the

hillock. It was still light there. He reached the top and saw the cap. Before

it sat the Chief laughing and holding his sides. Again Pahom remembered his dream, and

he uttered a cry: his legs gave way beneath him, he fell forward and reached

the cap with his hands. “Ah, what a fine fellow!” exclaimed the Chief. “He has

gained much land!” Pahom’s servant came running up and tried to raise him, but he

saw that blood was flowing from his mouth. Pahom was dead! The Bashkirs clicked their

tongues to show their pity. His servant picked up the spade and dug a grave

long enough for Pahom to lie in, and buried him in it. Six feet from

his head to his heels was all he needed.